We would like to welcome all of you to a special broadcast from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.
As you may have already heard yesterday, April 20th, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation ruled against Jehovah's Witnesses
and decided to liquidate the administrative center of Jehovah's Witnesses in Russia and all 395 local religious organizations.
In essence, this means that the properties owned by the organization, such as our Kingdom Halls and our beautiful branch office,
have been unjustly confiscated by the Russian government.
The ruling goes into effect immediately.
Our hearts go out to you dear brothers and sisters in Russia, but we know that you deeply appreciate the support given to you by the Worldwide Brotherhood.
Just think of how many letters were sent to Russian officials by your fellow worshippers around the world.
Contemplate how many prayers and supplications were offered up to Jehovah and will continue to be made in your behalf.
Your confidence in Jehovah warms our heart.
In just a moment, we will be speaking with Brother Mark Sanderson, who was present in the courtroom when the decision was announced.
However, before speaking with him, we know you will be very interested in this account of the six days of proceedings that led up to this very disappointing decision.
The report includes comments from a delegation of brothers sent by the governing body to meet with officials and to be present for portions of the trial.
Well, the governing body assigned me to come here, not only for the trial that's to take place today, but also to try and see if we could do something to encourage our brothers here on a small scale.
When we arrived at the airport, there was a large group of brothers.
Many of them were of considerable size. They just kind of shepherded us through the airport and we were standing there with them for a few minutes and one of the brothers suddenly smiled.
And he said to me in Russian, thank you so much for coming.
The fundamental question in this case is whether Jehovah's Witnesses are engaged in extremist activity,
and whether the administrative center is guilty of having organized this extremist activity.
When it became known that the Supreme Court of Russia was considering a ban on the worship of Jehovah's Witnesses, embassies from around the world requested information as to what led up to this.
We were successful in getting high level meetings with a number of different officials at embassies here in Moscow.
And it's really been quite impressive to see the reaction of these people in high station.
It impressed me that so many of them were eager to want to do something within the limited sphere that they have.
And uniformly, they are just amazed that Jehovah's Witnesses of all people are subject to criticism or ban on the basis of being extremist.
Now that comes across to them as completely absurd because if there's one group of people that's known for their neutrality, it is Jehovah's people.
Really now our eyes are poised toward the trial, we're getting ready to go to the court and we'll wait and see what's going to happen.
As we were going to the court, there were about 200 waiting to get into the courtroom.
Mostly our brothers, but then some who were just interested in the hearing, we could see the cameraman, the microphones and the many reporters who were there.
It was clear that this was now an international event.
Just when we were in the entrance way, we stepped in.
Here was a couple that I had met many years ago in Siberia.
And here they had come all the way from Siberia to testify and they hear it to be witnesses.
We have four different brothers representing the administrative center.
Each one would take the lead in arguing one motion.
The judge would listen to what the brothers had to say, turn to the Ministry of Justice and ask, does the Ministry of Justice have any input on this?
The prosecutor would stand, literally say two or three sentences, sit down and the judge would say,
the brothers raised 20 motions that they wanted the court to hear.
Of those 20 motions, the court granted only two of them to see how evidence that would exonerate us was not going to be allowed in the hearing.
After seeing so many of them beat us, then you began to see, well, they really weren't going to take any of them seriously.
For example, the brothers were able to show clearly that the congregations that had been liquidated were the result of planting of literature and that this was on video and that the Supreme Court would refuse to even see the video.
And that was really our lasting impression that this was a little bit of a sham.
And it was designed to go through the formalities, but you got the sense that the decision had already been taken.
At the hearing, representatives from many embassies were there. And as they listened to the court here, where their local congregations would be allowed to defend themselves, and to hear that the court said, no, they were not going to be heard.
These embassy representatives were appalled.
And I thought it was quite interesting that when they saw how ridiculous some of the rejection of the motions were at the trial, there was a murmur of laughter in the audience, particularly when the judge cut off our lawyers, when they were presenting the evidence of the planted publications.
This to them is evidence that it's so absurd that you haven't got the real evidence to bring a charge of extremism, so you plant evidence.
Although we were in the Supreme Court, they don't have so many formalities in the court as perhaps they have in other lands.
And so the brothers were allowed to stand up and walk around.
To me, more had the atmosphere of a circuit assembly than being in a courtroom.
I think it made the charge that's been brought upon us all the more absurd and ridiculous.
You know, just so many came up and said how grateful they were to feel the support from the governing body, that they were not facing the situation alone.
It occurred to me that it was really a small thing, you know, to travel here.
But for them, it was symbolic. They felt that the governing body was there with them.
The decision has not been made. We'll have to wait and see.
The government had only given us a six-day visa, and so it was impossible for us to stay any longer.
So our entire delegation, of course, with the exception of Brother Colin, we all had to leave the next day.
But we had in our mind that we were going to go and strengthen them, but as is always the case, I think we were the ones who came away, even more strengthened in our own faith.
One ten-year-old wrote this note to the visiting delegation.
Thank you for coming to support us and for your ministry.
Sasha, ten years old, Moscow.
As we were leaving and saying goodbye to these brothers, there was not a dry eye among us.
They were hugging Brother Sanderson and telling him, this is the spiritual high point of my life.
Something occurred in day two that was unexpected and surprising to us.
Interestingly, the judge became very active, and he began to really question the Ministry of Justice.
Why are you bringing this case? What evidence do you have that they are engaged in extremist activities?
Are there any personal experiences of the citizens?
Are there any cases that kidnapped and attacked the government that are responsible for the attack of this separatist movement?
Are there any threats that will cause a criminal attack over such citizens?
Well, if the citizens are united, then, well, of course, they will survive.
The third day of the hearing reminded us of Matthew 10, 18, and you will be brought before governors and kings.
The third day of the hearing reminded us of Matthew 10, 18.
And you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, but then what's the reason?
It says, for a witness to them and the nations.
The international community worldwide has now heard the testimony of six Jawah's witnesses clearly,
cogently, convincingly explaining to the court that we are law abiding peaceful citizens,
the farthest thing from extremist.
For example, one long time member of Jawah's witnesses, Vasilie Colin, explained to the judge that as a child,
he had been forced into exile with his parents and was forced to live in Siberia for years.
Vasilie, we have a lot of comrades in the city of the 20th century.
There are no human conditions for them.
But for me, it was interesting for me, one condition of this matter.
My parents, and also any witness of his, have been forced to run away from this society.
You can do whatever you want to do.
Write a comment on what you want.
It is interesting that you are willing and therefore you are willing to live in a wrong way,
in order for someone to get such an opportunity.
But such an opportunity was enough for me.
And it is only because they are not willing to be willing.
Today, nothing has changed.
The charges against him have now been expunged.
And now, at this point in his life, they are saying he is an extremist.
Anyone could see that the same efforts that had been made so long ago to try to hunt down and wipe out Jawah's witnesses
were just reappearing now at this particular time.
I was texting with one of the brothers at the Russia branch asking how things were going.
He says, wow, they just announced that the court has been suspended until Wednesday, April 12th,
the day after the memorial.
And we were all just, we could hardly believe it, that the court is ending on a Friday,
but being postponed until Wednesday.
How wonderful.
Because we realized that we could spend the evening calmly until the decision of the court.
This was the answer to our prayer.
The fourth day, our witness was released.
This is our brother, the sister, in which there is a scientific study,
they told us how the Bible helped them to change their life better,
that they can combine scientific work with religious activity.
And at this point, the witnesses were released from the foreign ministry of the United States,
who tried to convince the court that the witnesses have a higher education,
that they all work on the low paid work,
and that all of them are slaves of some kind of democratic state.
We had an adjournment up to April 19th.
That gives the brotherhood in Russia the opportunity to attend the special talk.
And that special talk is all about peace,
how to cultivate peace in an angry world.
So we really hope to be in the courtroom with our brothers at the time when the decision is issued.
Or even though it would seem almost impossible that we could get a visa to return to Russia,
basically, we would have to make application from Kazakhstan.
If Jehovah wills, and we're able to get the visa,
then Tuesday evening, I'll return to Russia,
and then on Wednesday morning, we will be in the court.
Brothers were hugging each other.
At lunchtime, everybody was sharing their sandwiches with each other.
The atmosphere of joy and love was unforgettable.
The judge began to go through all of the evidence.
And so there were 43 volumes of evidence that had been brought forth in the trial,
either by the Ministry of Justice or by our attorneys.
And so every one of those volumes had to be reviewed.
And so it was kind of a long process.
Our attorneys were able to ask the Ministry of Justice,
you know, where is the evidence that funding from the Administrative Center was used for any improper activities?
And it's just as long as it is today.
And so the brothers came back, well, tell me how much money, how many rubles, how many copex were spent?
You know, to fund this improper activity.
And I mean, well, we don't have any information like that.
We're sure that now, we've won this trial.
Even before the decision was made, we won it spiritually.
I think that in the history of the people of God in Russia,
this trial was a peak of interest and popularity among the population of our country.
And whenever the press, public activities in general, they didn't have interest in the people of Meogov and me.
I'm not sure if the decision was made, but the decision was made.
And I'd like to know who the third party of the administration is, and where the second party is.
And here, the government of the Republic and the government of Russia,
and although there are some local organizations,
If Anna was quite a surprise to me that one single judge could deliberate on six days
of evidence and within an hour come back and ban a religion from practicing its faith.
In one part of the body suffers, we all suffer and that would be the feeling throughout
the world I'm sure.
We will allow Jehovah our God to correct the injustices.
We will continue to be peaceable with all men.
We will never return evil for evil to anybody.
We have brother Mark Sanderson of the governing body tied in with us and we're so happy
to have you with us Mark and first we just like to thank you very much for
making the trip to Russia, Moscow to be with the brothers during this critical time.
And we heard so many comments about how much the brothers appreciated having you there
with them.
Oh, thank you so much, Steve.
You know, to stand unitedly with our brothers in Russia in that courtroom when they were facing
such a vicious attack on their worship from the devil was a tremendous privilege.
I have to say, you know, in all my years in serving Jehovah, I don't think I ever felt
so proud to be one of Jehovah's Witnesses as when I was standing in that courtroom.
Very encouraging, Mark.
But tell us please a little more about what was the reaction of the brothers when they
heard this negative decision?
You know, Steve, to understand their reaction, I think we have to just kind of recap with
what's been happening because for the last couple of days, you know, there has been such
a joyful spirit in the courtroom.
The brothers and sisters have been walking around, greeting one another, taking photographs,
you know, hugging one another.
There's just been this tremendous joyful feeling within this courtroom.
And so then just before the decision was given, we heard the closing statements from our
four attorneys, and also from brother Sergei Cheropanov and brother Vasili Kalin, who
are both on the branch committee in Russia.
And you know, these brothers made such powerful statements.
Their arguments were so compelling that, you know, we all felt just very pumped up by
what they said.
And then one of the statements that several of these brothers made was that really it's
not, we're not really standing before the Russian Supreme Court.
But really, the great judge of the universe, Jehovah, is the one who's judging all matters.
And they reminded everyone in that courtroom that everyone is going to have to stand before
the judgment seat of God.
And when we heard that, we all just felt so inspired, you know, by those comments.
Well, then after a few moments when the judge actually issued his decision, and the brothers
and sisters heard that it was negative, you know, it was just totally silent in the courtroom.
There was no, there was no outcry, there was no comment.
Some of the brothers shook their head.
I think we were just all in total disbelief that the judge could issue such an unjust
decision after hearing these, these tremendous arguments from our brothers.
I have to say, although we were stunned by the unjust decision, there was no hint in
that courtroom that our brothers are backing down, that they're cowering, or that they're
going to give up their service to Jehovah.
In fact, you could see that they were even strengthened by this decision to go on serving
Jehovah faithfully under their new circumstances.
Those comments mark are so heartening to us to hear.
But even though there was a negative decision, how would you say that a great shout of praise
has gone up to Jehovah's name?
You know, Steve, I just keep coming back to what Jesus said in Matthew chapter 10 and
verse 18.
He said that we would be brought before kings and governors for a witness to them and
to the nations.
Well, that's exactly what's happened here.
We have been brought before kings and governors, but what a tremendous witness has been given
to them and to the nations.
For example, we did this letter writing campaign.
Our brothers participated all around the world.
And then the news media caught on to that and many newspapers and other media outlets reported
on this tremendous effort to write letters to the officials of the Russian government.
In the delegation that was sent by the governing body to Moscow, we were able to meet with three
different ambassadors from the largest countries on this earth.
And these ambassadors who are so difficult to meet with welcomed us in, they listened
to us patiently and they showed that they had a very deep respect for Jehovah's witnesses
being very familiar with our work and really wanting to do things to help Jehovah's people.
It was wonderful.
And then consider all the media coverage that's been taking place on the court case day after
day after day.
And now we have a decision.
And so now this court decision is going to be publicized by the media all over the world
again.
And still to come, we have our appeals that are going to be made in the Russian Supreme
Court, in the European Court of Human Rights with the Human Rights Commission.
All of this is going to result in more publicity.
And in the end, really, what can we say?
Well, people who know Jehovah's Witnesses, people who have Jehovah's Witnesses as their
neighbors, as their workmates, as their schoolmates, who really know who we are, when they hear
these reports, they are going to immediately recognize that these charges are ridiculous
and absurd.
And they are perhaps even going to want to ask questions and perhaps even become interested
in the truth.
So, even through this negative decision, Jehovah's name is being exalted and glorified
in all the earth.
That is so wonderful, Brother Sanderson, what you've expressed.
And one thing that we're just so happy about is that the brothers were able to celebrate
the memorial of Christ's death before the negative decision was rendered.
I know many of us.
I was praying and others were praying.
If it be Jehovah's will, of course, we always want his will to take place.
But if it was his will, then at least they could celebrate the memorial in peace.
And so that happened and we're so happy.
Yes, that was my prayer too.
And really, when the decision was made to adjourn the court until the day after the memorial,
we really had to see Jehovah's hand in it because across Russia, now that all the reports
have come in, we understand that only in three cases did the police come to a location
where the memorial was being celebrated.
But even in those cases, they did not attempt to disturb the occasion.
So we can say that our brothers were able to celebrate the memorial all across Russia
in peace.
And of course, even with the special talk, because again, the court adjourned, the special
talk was also held across Russia in peace.
And so, in a mighty way, Jehovah stood by his people and allowed them to have these two
very important spiritual occasions before this decision.
We thank Jehovah for that blessing.
And we thank you, Mark, for those very encouraging comments.
And we thank you again for representing the governing body there in Russia and supporting
the brothers.
We really appreciate it and please travel home safely.
Thank you so much, Steve.
It was such a wonderful privilege to be able to be in Russia with our dear brothers at
this historic moment.
I look forward to seeing you when I return.
And we would like to thank all of you for your support.
Your dear brothers and sisters gave heartfelt prayers.
You willingly supported the letter writing campaign.
For some of you sending a letter to one or more of the six Russian officials came at a
great expense.
We commend you for your strong love for your brothers in Russia and for your loyalty
to Jehovah's organization.
But does the Supreme Court's decision against us mean that the letter writing campaign failed?
Are that Jehovah did not hear our prayers?
Absolutely not.
It simply means that we have yet to see how Jehovah will maneuver events and harmony
with his will.
In the meantime, we are confident that our dear brothers and sisters in Russia will remain
steadfast and that Psalm 112, 7 or 8 will be true of them.
There it says of Jehovah's righteous one, he will not fear bad news.
His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.
His heart is unshakable.
He is not afraid.
In the end, he will look and triumph on his adversaries.
As long as we are still living in this old system, as we have seen in Russia and many
other lands, we can expect persecution for simply wanting to worship Jehovah in peace.
But do we need to fear such persecution?
No.
Jesus Christ and the heavenly armies are ready to take the lead in defending Jehovah's people.
We can rest assured that according to Isaiah 54, 17, no weapon formed against us will have
any success.
And why?
Because Jehovah is on our side.
May we all continue to pray for our dear brothers and sisters in Russia whom we love very
much.
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.